Hello everyone.
Welcome back to the Premier videos
for Fall 2025 Natick Town Meeting.
I'm joined by Rich Sydney, member of your select board
to here to talk about articles 11
and 12, which the select board is a sponsor for.
So let's take 'em in turn.
I'm sure you know what we're, we're trying
to cover here is just really understand what the gist
of the article is and what we might expect
to have happen on the floor of town meeting about them.
So Article 11 is really about,
I believe it's like a reference table in a bylaw
that talks about which committees the
select board makes appointments to.
So maybe tell us a little bit about that section
of the bylaw and what you're proposing
to do under Article 11.
Well, let me take 'em in reverse. Okay. If you don't mind.
Sure. Because article we're gonna, we're gonna request
through a procedural motion
that Article 12 be taken up first anyway.
Okay. Because the results of that vote will actually,
It might require a board being added to the list or not.
Yes, exactly. So, so Article 12 is about the Information
systems advisory board.
Right. So, so maybe talk a little bit about
what that board is and does.
Yes. The select board's role in appointing it
and what you're hoping to happen.
So we have two board, two advisory boards
that we appoint.
And one is the information systems advisory board,
and the other is the Cable advisory board.
And for the last eight years
we've been point appointing the same people to both.
And there are historical reasons for that among them that
the town's cable internet infrastructure
supplied by the cable companies as part of their deals.
And so that's why they sort of are co-joined.
We wanna make them one board, one advisory board
that will advise on both things.
But because the information systems advisory board is
described in bylaw, that's difficult.
We can't just merge 'em without making massive
changes to that bylaw.
We've also recognized that some of what the
ISAB, the Information Systems Advisory Board was created
to advise on,
they really can't advise us on, a lot of it has to do with
security and other, you know, very sensitive infrastructures
and it can't be discussed in an open meeting.
Hmm. So they can't really advise us on that anyway,
which is another reason we wanna merge 'em
because there are things that they can advise us on.
You know, they can, they know things about, you know,
what's the right model of router to recommend.
In addition, we have a really competent IT director who's
overseeing the IT departments
for both the schools and the town.
And I don't wanna rely on personalities going forward
because that's not a good idea,
which is why we don't really want
to completely get rid of the board.
But the easiest way to combine those boards, frankly, is
to repeal that bylaw.
Then we, then the select board has the authority to,
you know, make the charge whatever it wants
and appoint good people that are gonna continue
to do the job that we want them to do.
We're hoping the town meeting's gonna support the repeal.
We got a, a referral recommendation from the FinCon.
There will be, I will be providing you
with a, a main motion.
Okay. And I believe it'll appear in the FinCon book as well,
along with a memo that the board wrote.
Okay. And so since the,
the fin com hearing what's been happening
with the content of the motion,
So the content of the motion, we've asked the chair
of the fin com to put it in the book along with the memo
that came from the chair of the select board
explaining our rationale.
So that should all be in the book.
And I'll be moving the main motion on the
floor of town meeting as
Printed in the book,
As printed in the book.
And I will also provide it. Alright.
In a, in a formal form,
I've got several motions that I owe you.
Okay. Including,
including the procedural motion to swap the order.
All right. And then, no.
And so the, and the reason for the procedural motion,
which is worth talking about, is you want to have
that change done because then the content of the table
that's in article,
the motion under Article 11 may be slightly different based
on the outcome of Article 12. Right.
So if Article 12 passes, if the main motion passes,
then the original main motion
that you'll get will be correct.
If it doesn't pass,
then you'll have an alternative main motion
with the Information systems
advisory board listed in the table. Okay. Not
An amendment, but an I'll,
I'll have, I'll give you two main motions. Okay.
Because, because also in Article 11,
if my understanding is correct, there is not a,
a favorable recommendation from the
finance committee for Article 11. That is
Correct.
So maybe talk about the substance
of what's going on in Article 11 to,
to give folks some context.
So as we were looking at Article 12,
the repeal, we realized that there were several
obsolete committees listed in the table of appointments
for the, that the select board makes.
And because section two of article bylaw, article 10
says that the board has
to appoint all the committees listed, we realized
that we needed to modify that table extensively.
And we started doing research into where each
of the appointments listed came from.
And most of them were added to the table when the board,
when the border committee existed.
And the table was never modified when boards
essentially didn't have to do their job anymore.
And we stopped appointing them.
So as a board, we decided that the right thing to do
was to make that table much more cleanly.
A cross reference of all the required appointments,
either from Mass General law
or from charter or bylaws.
And also we're, we're including in that same list,
the number of appointments we make.
And that will allow us to,
you know, not have to make a bylaw change when a, you know,
committee goes out of, you know, when the need
for a committee gets removed.
So it's much, we, we expect it to be much more
of a cross reference.
We've done a lot of research.
One of the reasons for the referral is
because one of the FinCon members, quite rightly,
and I really appreciate all the work they did,
found some errors in the citations.
Okay. Which is why it's the motion is the current motion
that you nobody's seen yet.
Right. Except for me is off at being reviewed
by town council to make sure all the citations are correct.
Right. And when I get an answer back from council,
hopefully this week I'll have the main motion ready for you
and you'll be proposing that from the floor yourself.
And I will be proposing that from the floor at town meeting.
We also have a memo that's going in the book, the version
of the motion that's gonna be in the book
has incorrect references.
So we won't be using that. Right.
Because they don't have,
they don't have the right motion at this point.
So you'll get that as well. Okay.
And, but what we, what we really want to do is we've been a,
as, as a little bit of background, one
of the things the board has been doing is going
through all the committees we appoint, reviewing what their,
what their charge is, what they're supposed to be doing,
and you know, how many people they're supposed to have.
And you know, with the exception of the merger
of the Cable Advisory Board
and the Information Systems advisory board, you know,
we've got a pretty good list of committees on the web.
We feel that's the best place for the public to go
to find out what opportunities are available.
We're gonna be, we're in the process of reviewing that.
We're gonna be updating that with additional information.
Like, you know, if we, if we have a sense
of the time commitment that a particular committee requires,
we can put that on the web along with here's the charge
and here's how often you meet
and you know,
here's why this committee exists and things like that.
So the table that's gonna be in the bylaws is gonna be
a cross reference of required appointments while the,
the website will be, you know, these are all the committees.
And then if we dissolve one
because we don't need them anymore,
like we dissolved the sustainability committee,
it's still in the bylaw.
They don't exist anymore.
We have a Net zero committee instead. It's just an example.
And so we think the web is a better place to keep a,
an accurate select board under its jurisprudence is allowed
to create committees
and continue to appoint committees as it needs to.
We're not planning to get rid of any
of these committees at all.
We just wanna manage them a little more cleanly. Alright.
And, and so just for, for members reference,
when you're looking at the website
for the fall 2025 town meeting, look on the section of
that page for Proposed Motions, you'll see
the select Board's motions WR written there.
Rich, I believe you'll be making them from the floor.
But to read the detail,
'cause there are some detail in the tables
and the citations you mentioned.
Just look through all the detail for that on the, on the
fall annual town meeting website.
Thanks for coming in Rich and talking about the motions.
No problem. Anytime.
We'll see you at town meeting. See you
Town meeting. Alright,
So now we're gonna start talking about articles 13 and 14
and to discuss those, I'm joined by
Andrew Gore, who's our town clerk.
Hello for the town of Natick.
Andrew and I work together a lot.
Just not to bring on this, but we, we spend a lot
of time talking about town meeting stuff anyway.
And so where we're in email contact constantly leading up
to town meeting, you're literally my right hand guy when
we're in on the stage at town meeting.
So thank you for all the help that you do on that.
But this is interesting because you are actually sponsoring
two articles that are on the warrant for for town meeting
and that's not, that's not unusual
'cause the, the town clerk's office, you know,
might have business that needs to be updated
and changed for our bylaws.
Absolutely. Yeah. That's what's going on here.
You got a couple of these things.
Yeah. All right, so let's, let's get into it.
So let's start with article 13, which is about acceptance
of mass general law chapter 41, section one 10 A.
And if you don't know what that is,
it's about allowing the town offices
to close on the Saturday before an election.
So kind of walk us through what we currently do today
and what this is proposing to change.
Absolutely. Thanks for having me.
And it's been a pleasure working with you at town meeting
and leading up to town meeting.
So going into article 13, the acceptance
of Mass General Law, this is a provision in mass general
laws that would allow our office
to remain closed on the Saturday, the last day, last
Saturday to register to vote proceeding an election.
So as it stands right now,
there anyone can register to vote up
to 10 days before an election.
That deadline usually falls on a Saturday.
So the state mandates that we stay open from 9:00 AM
to 5:00 PM to register those that may come in
to register to vote.
Looking back at the few elections that we have
that I have administered here in, in the town Natick,
there have been, there's been very little traffic
specifically in the March, 2025 town election,
we had a $7 million override on the ballot
and some contested school committee and select board races.
However, no one came in that day.
Everyone has access to the worldwide
web probably in their pocket at this point.
There are voter registration forms at town hall
and other public buildings.
So it's very easy to register to vote.
And so I don't think people are coming in as much
to register to vote anymore.
So this is a cost saving measure for the town.
It would essentially eliminate some overtime on a given
Saturday for both the town personnel
and the town custodian who would have
to monitor the building
and you know, allow access, that sort of thing.
So I think it's just a, it's just a
cost saving measure for the town.
Again, let me just highlight this.
This applies only to town elections for state
and federal elections such as the midterms
that are coming up in November, 2026
and the September election leading up to that next year,
we would be open on those Saturdays
because that is a state election
and the state does have its own election calendar.
So this would only apply to the March town elections. Yeah.
And you've brought this through Article 13 already
through the finance committee and to the select board
and you got favorable recommendations
from both of them for this?
Yes, yes. I've discussed it with both of them
and everyone seems to be on board with it. Okay,
Great.
So that's article 13. So let's talk, talk about article 14.
So, which is amending bylaw article 50 to, to
specifically about dog license and kennel license fees.
And what I like to say is a lot of people like
to talk about like trucks and police cars at town meeting.
Beyond that, a very popular second topic at town meeting is
dogs and what we do to to, to allow them
or not allow them around in, in town.
This is more around the fees
and right now I think in order to change dog license fees
or kennel license fees,
it's gotta go to town meeting, right?
That is correct, yes. And,
and that's, that's gonna be a cumbersome process.
So what is this proposing to do differently?
You said it in a nutshell. It's a cumbersome process
as it stands, this process as it currently as it stands
would require that town meeting warrant be brought forth
before town meeting to change these fees.
And then it would have to go before town meeting
after that it would have to get approval from the A'S
office, which can take up to 90 days.
So if we have a fall town meeting
and we want to change the fees for 2026,
that's impossible at this point.
So this would eliminate that cumbersome process.
Essentially it would require that the town
that the select board weigh in and consider these fees
and vote on these fees, there is a provision
that would would require a public hearing be set
or announced prior to the select board meeting so
that people are aware that, you know,
dialed license fees will be discussed and voted on.
So that is part of the process just to eliminate it,
to get out of the police bylaws
and just to put it under the purview of the select board for
just the ease of, of ease of change I
Guess.
And, and the select board sets
fees for other things as well.
Right. So there's already an established process
and hearing process that they would
be using for these fees as well?
Absolutely. As I, as I understand it,
aside from the liquor license fees, I,
I do believe they set like the common Vic fees,
entertainment license fees, that sort of thing.
So this would be under another thing under their purview.
And furthermore the town,
the town C-B-R-C-I believe has been working to update
town bylaws and, and and and remove fees from there.
So I think this is just another small piece
of the equation just to enhance the bylaws and clean them up
and just take the fees out
and put them under, you know, the appropriate
Review.
And this was heard at the finance committee got a unanimous
favorable recommendation from finance committee?
Absolutely, yes. Was heard from the select board obviously
'cause they'd be taking on the responsibility
and you got a favorable
recommendation from the select board as well?
Indeed, indeed. Alright, well thanks.
I'm gonna be seeing a lot of you at town meeting anyway,
but particularly on these two topics, I'm, I'm,
we haven't quite settled where the consent agenda falls,
but it might be something
that we actually considered putting on the consent agenda
but depending on which way that goes,
we'll definitely see you at town meeting
to speak to these if necessary.
Absolutely, I'll be
There. Thanks for coming in. Thanks
For having me.
Thanks. Hi everyone. Jeff Alderson, your town moderator.
Wanna talk with you about article 15 that's on the warrant
for the fall 2025 town meeting in Natick.
This is an article about setting up a hybrid
town meeting committee.
Hybrid meetings would allow residents of the town as well
as town meeting members to participate without having
to physically be in the room when we convene
in person for town meeting.
You might recall back in the pandemic back in 2020
that we did a wholly online town meeting
in an emergency response.
It was kind of done under duress.
It wasn't exactly the best way
of doing an online town meeting,
but we learned a lot from that process.
When I was campaigning for moderator, one
of the things I talked to people a lot about was inclu in
improving accessibility and inclusion for town meeting
and a hybrid meeting is a good way of doing that.
And so what you're seeing here in Article 15
and there'll be a motion which would be
to establish this hybrid town meeting committee made up of
nine people, eight of which would be town meeting members
appointed by the moderator, another
person from Natick Pegasus also appointed by the moderator.
The goal of that is to explore whether Natick should
have a hybrid option for town meeting
and then talk about what
that would look like if put into a plan of action.
And so that committee would be chartered with coming back
to spring 2026 town meeting with a set of recommendations.
Those recommendations might be bylaw changes,
it might be a budget line item added to the regular budget
for technology for vendor support for a hybrid town meeting.
It might be a recommendation of implementation timeline.
Also a report about their findings around the legal and,
and inclusive and accessible requirements
for holding such a meeting.
And so I'm really focused on this as the sponsor
of Article 15 because I do believe
that it would be a really good thing
for democracy at the local level
if the town had a hybrid option.
However, I wanna make sure we go through this process
in a nice deliberate fashion
and understand whether we should do a hybrid meeting
and if so, how would we implement it.
And I think that the motion under article 15 is a
step in the right direction.
We will have more information about this available at at
town meeting if you read the text of the article
and the motion on the fall 2025 town meeting website.
I'm also happy to answer any questions if anybody has 'em
about use of hybrid meetings.
I also wanna point out some,
some folks have asked me already questions about the
composition of the committee
and who I might appoint back in at the end of the spring
town meeting I actually did an informal survey
of town meeting members and I asked if people would be
interested on serving on such a committee if
one were established.
And I have a slew of volunteers that are interested in that
as well as other people whom are known to me
that participated in the online town meeting we held back in
2020 and other folks
that have expressed interest
in being part of this committee.
So I'm confident we would have a good mix of perspectives
and diverse backgrounds of people
but representing all aspects
and issues related to what a hybrid town meeting
would mean for the town.
And in terms of timeline, I would wanna make sure
that those appointments happen very quickly
after the close of town meeting.
So after seven days of town meeting,
once this is in effect if, if we have a positive vote
to establish this committee,
I would be appointing those folks in earnest
because I wanna make sure they have as much time as possible
to work on this worthwhile issue.
Thank you for your attention on article 15
and we'll talk more about it at town meeting.
We're here now to talk about Article 19
and I've got Claire from the town administration.
Claire, you mind introducing yourself
and what your job title is at at the office?
Of course. My name is Claire Rundel
and I'm the conservation agent
and environmental planner in the community
and economic development department.
And last time you were here we
were talking about floodplains.
Exactly. This
Is not what we're talking about this time.
Thankfully not.
Yeah.
So, but Article 19 is now we're talking about money. Yes.
So Article 19 is around establishing a revolving fund
for land disturbance and stormwater management.
So kind of walk us through maybe what that definition is.
What is land disturbance in stormwater
and then also what's planned to come
to town meeting here in the fall?
Of course. So land disturbance
and stormwater management is essentially any activity
that would qualify for review
and approval under Article 79 A of the town bylaws,
which is our stormwater management
and erosion control bylaw.
Okay. So there are permits that are required
for certain projects that meet thresholds.
There are filing fees associated
with those permit applications.
So the establishment of this fund would create a proper
revolving fund for those filing fees to be deposited into
that the town can then use in the future
for stormwater management activities on town
Property.
So this would establish the fund in the fall town meeting
monies would start to go in outside of town meeting,
but then in order to actually authorize the use
of those funds, that would be
another act of town meeting. Right,
Exactly.
So the article for this fall is just
to establish the revolving fund so
that those filing fees can be begin
depositing in the correct account.
And then in the spring under the revolving fund article,
that's a pretty standard warrant article on the SPRINGTOWN
meeting we would authorize maximum expenditures from
that account and also what the funds can be expended on on
that SPRINGTOWN meeting or
An article.
And it's already been heard at the finance committee. Yes.
I heard it was a unanimous favorable recommendation.
Anything noteworthy in terms of questions you got
that people at town meeting
might wanna know about the article? Nothing
Noteworthy as noted by Julian on the finance committee.
This is unfortunately a problem that a lot
of communities face accounts were set up in earlier years
that weren't following the appropriate guidelines
with the state sort of getting more in depth
and making sure towns are processing their funds correctly.
Lots of communities are working to sort
of clean up these types of accounts.
This bylaw was first established in 2012
and filing fees we're rolling in.
Okay. Those, none of those funds have been able to be used
or touched because of this lack
of an established revolving fund for these filing fees.
So really just trying to clean up some errors of the past
and make sure that the town is setting ourselves up
for potentially an additional funding source
for storm water management
improvements in the future. Great.
Always a good thing to do. Exactly. I think that's it.
Thanks for coming in. Yeah, of course.
And and we'll see you at town meeting
Indeed. You will.
Thanks. Hello everyone. Welcome back to the video.
This time starting on article 30.
I'm joined today by Chris Weisman who is the secretary
of the charter and bylaw review committee.
And we're gonna be talking about three articles today,
30, 31 and 32.
We're gonna take 'em in order starting with Article 30.
And, and what I wanna also, before we get into this is point
out, this is, this might be the last time that's right.
We hear from this iteration of the CBRC at town meeting,
maybe do you remember when CBRC was actually started
and kind of give us a little bit of a background about
how long this has been a journey through our bylaws?
So yes, the charter requires that
a charter committee's review committee is formed every five
years after the previous one dissolves.
And so in fall town meeting of 2022,
the charter and bylaw review committee
was approved by town meeting.
And then moderator at the time Frank Foss,
he nominated
or you know, put on the committee I think 10 people.
And so we convened in January of 2023, you know,
and elected our officials
and began the work of digging into the charter.
Over the course of that time we lost two
or three members, you know, one to a health issue, one
to somebody who was never able to meet, you know, with the,
with the schedule that had been set.
So for the last pretty much two years,
it's been a solid seven members of the committee
and we've done a complete review of the charter
and then we did a complete review of the bylaws
that the town departments wanted to actually work
On.
It's incredibly detailed, I would say almost thankless work
as, as a relatively new moderator.
I've, I've, I try to jump in
and learn about what you guys are doing.
I actually, I, I added to your workload a little bit,
we'll we'll talk about that in one
of the articles that's come through.
But I got firsthand just wanna say thank you
and the whole committee for the service to the town.
There's a lot that goes into what you do
before it even shows up in an article or in
before it shows up on the floor for debate
of a bylaw change.
So thank you again.
It's, it's really been very humbling.
Like I put my hand up to do this
'cause I was like, it's probably good
to have some like fresh look, you know, at this.
'cause I'd never really done anything, you know,
looking at the charter and you know, even
as a longtime town meeting member, I wasn't as familiar
with the charter or the bylaws
or town meeting time as I probably should have been.
So I can't believe how much I've learned.
And even then there's just so many intricate details
of the charter that really are so important to
how we guide the town.
So the previous charter
and bylaw review committees hadn't done the level
of deep dive that this committee did.
And so that's why we've been at town meeting
23, 24 and now two meetings in 25.
So six full town meetings plus a special town meeting
to handle all the things that we felt were important
to improve the charter
and then also improve the
efficiency of town meeting. Right.
And so we're, we're, we're kind
of having this conversation in the context of Article 30.
'cause Article 30 is really,
and the only motion that's a, that's been proposed
for Article 30 is a motion
to hear a report from the committee.
And so that report will kind
of touch on the history a little bit.
The the work, the the last mile work that's being done.
But once this report is heard, if voted
and heard at town meeting for article 30, that's it.
Right? The C this in this instance of the C BRC
Is done.
We are not asking for an extension,
we're not asking for any more money.
We will cease to exist when Tom meeting dissolves, you know,
at the, you know, whenever Tom meeting dissolves in 2025.
And then all our remaining money
that we have had appropriated
for our town council will go back to free cash.
Excellent. And is there anything I,
without going into the details, I, we talked earlier
that the report for the CBRC
that will be shared in like summary PowerPoint form from the
floor of town meeting, that'll be shared on the
website as well so that members
Can Yeah, we, we always have a written report
and we always reference our prior reports
because that reflects all the work that we've done.
So I'm hoping this will be one of our shorter reports,
but at the same time, you know, we'll also give an update,
you know, on the special act both, you know,
in the oral report and then in the written report.
So is there anything you wanna say about the,
the Special act or are there any highlights you
Report?
I think we're really fortunate
that Representative Linsky has been able
to kind of keep an eye on this.
You know, the, the bill was filed in January
and then it moved to committee
and then there's been three readings
in the house committee.
So, and it's been released and passed by the house.
So now it's in the Senate, it's had the second reading
of the bill it rep, Senator s spiller's office just shared
that it's with Senate council.
Okay. 'cause they do all the review of any
of the home rule petitions.
So no timeline yet on what, how long that would take. But
It feels any day
Now it feels good.
So I've talked with the town clerk to find out, you know,
kind of what's the last date, you know,
that it could be signed by the governor so
that it could go on the next election.
And he said early February,
but I've been kind
of telling anybody in the
legislature it's gotta be done by January. So
In an ideal world, if it happens pretty soon,
it's likely there might be a ballot
Question.
There would be a ballot question.
If this is passed by the legislature, both houses
and then signed by the governor pretty much by the end
of January, there will be a ballot question
on the March, 2026 ballot and it will be a straight up
and down yes or no question. Do you, and
That would include everything that was part
of the special act,
which was multiple bylaw changes proposed.
No, no. Multiple charter changes.
Multiple charter changes, sorry, proposed. Yes. Yes.
And those were, those changes were proposed as part of the
Three different town meetings.
Right. So the question will actually reflect the fact that,
you know, does, do you know,
do the voters approve all the charter changes that happened?
And it will list each of the individual TOM meetings where
the charter changes were initiated
and passed by Tom meeting.
Excellent. And so, yeah,
so it'll be a straight up yes or no question.
You can't, there's no editing the special act
after it's been signed into law.
I appreciate the extra detail.
'cause some people that might be watching this
or who are town meeting members may not even realize
that even just though something was voted at town meeting,
particularly if it's like the charter
process, it is a process.
Right. And that's, that's,
that's kicking something else off.
And here we are over a year later in some cases
and we're finally now getting it
not even net to a ballot question. So,
So the charter, if it passes in March,
like the charter changes would go into effect right away.
There's no attorney general review.
The thing about the yes
and no question is that that's what the legislators like
with a special act, you know, home rule petition.
Once the governor signs it, it could just go into law.
But the legislators really want the town I
see folk to have input.
And so that was advice of our council that we actually
include that so that the individual's in town.
So if there's something that people don't like in it,
which hopefully that's not the case anymore
with all the work that we've done, you know, it has to be,
you have to vote no, you can't pick that part out.
Right. Unless you go back
and do a, you know, a more the type
of charter change that people are used to.
Like someone could come back in
and put a charter article on to get rid of
what we added in the special act.
I think as long as it's not the kind of thing that has
to be handled by a special
Act.
So more to come from that, more to come Yeah.
In any, in any details what happen about, sorry.
No, it's great. It's, the detail's actually very helpful.
That's why we do these videos. But anything else
that might be happening after today will be posted
to the CBRC webpage. We'll
Try to, yes.
We'll we'll have a report, we'll have you send it out.
It'll be on the CBRC webpage as will all our other reports.
Fantastic. So Article 30 is only gonna have one motion
talking about hearing the report and that's
It.
And then yeah, they have to vote
it before I give the report. Yeah.
So,
So I was so nervous the last time I was just like,
I I I have a hunch that time meaning, you know,
probably should hear, you know, what you have
to say 'cause it's the last meeting.
So it's the last meeting. Okay.
Let's talk about Article 31 in terms
of finishing the business of the CBRC.
Right? So article 31 is referencing two bylaw
changes specifically.
And maybe let's take them in turn and,
and this is not the first time town meeting has
heard about these things before.
So kind of walk us through how they're
on the, the warrant for this time.
So when we went through all the bylaws, you know, we met
with different town officials and so the first motion,
motion a was from last fall.
And you know, we worked with the Board of Health to put
motion a forward or last fall.
What happened at fin,
excuse me last spring was that they,
they found some wording challenges
and so FinCon sent it back to us
and we as a committee actually fixed it
and wanna go back to FinCon, but they were done.
So like they didn't, you couldn't, another hearing,
we couldn't hold another hearing
and so we just, you know, asked everybody
to refer it back knowing
we would bring it back in the spring.
Okay. So that actually happened
with both the motions A and B.
Okay. So the first one
regarding the underground propane tanks, it's kind
of interesting, but some developers like to bury those,
you know, big round propane tanks
that people use to fuel their homes.
They just think either the
homeowner or they just think it looks nicer.
Yeah. So the Board of health wants the ability
to regulate those to kind of make sure to take care
of groundwater, you know, and, and,
and other issues that they think that are reflected.
So like almost the entire text of
bylaw article 31, I think it's bylaw article 31,
but whatever the underground tank, whatever the article
81 chemical
Storage tank system storage dates.
Yeah. So Article 81, you know, a lot of the text has changed
and it basically just gives the town board of health the,
you know, the right to regulate that
and require, you know, inspections.
What's important that people understand is
that it doesn't impact the typical propane tanks
that we might use for outdoor heaters
or fire pits or our grills.
It's only underground storage tanks. Okay.
So it is pretty, you know,
straightforward the fin finance committee, you know,
voted 13 0 0 to, you know, move this forward
and if people have any questions,
I'm sure someone from the board, the Department
of Health would be there, you know, to explain it.
But you know, it's, it's, it's makes sense to do this.
Okay. And then the, the other motion is around
a new bylaw section
for a town council specifically around zoning. Right,
Right.
So we have a bylaw
that says the town should have town council
and it kind of guides the town on
how the select board would pick town council.
And the committee has dealt with the subject
of adding advisory special zoning council kind of almost
for like a year and a half.
It's, it's kind of came up as a a as a concept.
And there ha we, we did have a meeting, you know,
before last spring, you know,
and several members of past planning board members,
you know, came to talk about it.
But zoning is just such an important part
of our town management and you have to get zoning perfect
because if you don't have zoning perfect,
then it can lead to problems.
And you know, there have been times in the past when
zoning's been voted and you know, we actually had to come
to next town meeting and put a moratorium on what was voted
because it wasn't perfect.
And so the concept with this additional
section to the town council bylaw is
that the town would have access to special
advisory zoning council who would be hired by the town
and under, you know, with the, a set expectation
that they would become intimately familiar
with Natick zoning bylaws.
And so then as new zoning laws were proposed,
there would be, you know, not just all the work that's done
by the town staff and the planning board,
but you'd have an extra set of independent eyes
that would look at it
and make sure that everything was in the right place.
You know, and during our meetings we've had discussions
about when things might have been left out
or you know, issues where,
I mean even like even the a UDI think we're gonna be making
some corrections, you know, and that could be
because you know, more further understanding of the law,
but it's just really important that we don't make the kind
of mistakes that could result in litigation.
Right. So we're proposing
that there should be special advisory council,
they would have expertise in natick zoning laws,
they would be available to the planning board,
but they'd also be available to finance committee.
And Tom meeting like finance committee is required
to have a public hearing about a zoning article
after the planning board does.
And it's pretty rare
to have someone on the finance committee
that understands zoning.
So it's like they're really dependent.
I'm gonna take a note and make sure that
for future appointments for the finance committee,
that's my, that's my responsibility.
Right. Somebody has to be a zoning expert.
Someones be a zoning expert. Yeah. Yeah.
Like that would be really amazing.
But that also puts a lot of pressure on that person too.
Right. You know, but either way, the other problem
with the finance committee hearings
for zoning articles is they're often happening
right before the book has to go.
No. Like they have to wait to have their hearing
until after planning board.
So you know, there, there's a,
the planning board hearing is statutory by law.
The zoning, the zoning hearing, the zoning article
by finance committee is statutory by Natick by bylaw.
But it doesn't necessarily mean
that you're gonna catch the errors if there are any.
So, you know, there's so much work that the town goes into,
you know, fine tuning our zoning bylaws
and the planning board's been doing a lot of work on that.
But we just think it would be helpful for men, you know,
to have access to that council that would be available,
you know, to, to make sure
that everything was done correctly.
So that's our proposal. That's what motion B is all about,
is putting the town, you know,
giving the town the opportunity to appoint this kind
of council and then, you know, then they would have to,
future appropriations would have to be done right.
But this is just putting the bylaw
in so that you can have it.
And so just some specifics on that.
So the choice of appointing the council
that would be left up to the select board is would be
Up select board
Usually.
And then the budget for that would be in the
usual manner. It would have to
Be for budgeting.
Yes. You'd have to be an appropriation for that as well.
But with that, those aren't being dealt with.
This is just the bylaw to create that opportunity.
And then once this would go through, assuming this is,
then everything gets approved, right? Then that
Conversation would happen, the
select for the next budgeting process.
Right? The select board would, yeah. So
All, so that's Article 31.
Okay. Article 32 Changes in town meeting
time and Town bylaws.
I wanna say the reason that this article is here
and the reason that the CBRC took this up,
I'm gonna say it was my fault.
And so all I'll say is I really appreciate
that the CBRC took up this extra topic on your last session.
I know it was a bit of a curve ball,
but I think it was really good work and I, and I and, and
and I, I joined every meeting where this was being discussed
to be there as a, as a resource if needed.
But, but kind of let's, let's walk everyone through
what we're talking about with time, time meeting time.
So just set context for people
that are watching particularly a lot
of time meeting members out there.
The current bylaws state explicitly that the version
of town meeting time, so the book that we use
for the supplemental set of rules
and processes that I use as moderator to manage the flow
of debate and votes at town meeting our,
our book is Town Meeting Time
and we commonly say no we don't use, you know,
Robert's rules of order, we use town meeting time.
We use specifically today based on our
bylaws, the third edition,
The third edition of Town
Meeting time,
the fourth edition of town meeting time was published in
October of 2024.
Right. And I knew then when I was going
through some professional development on my own
to learn about what it meant to be a moderator,
I knew this was, this was coming.
And when I talked to the previous moderator, he said, well,
and I, and I talked with others that were interested,
he said, well actually you have to go through
and do a bylaw change because I don't think
that we can use the fourth edition of town meeting time
until we do something.
So I brought it to the CBRC
to say it's more than just a bylaw change
to say, use the fourth edition.
What would happen at town meeting?
What would be the impact on our processes?
What would, is there anything in conflict with
our current bylaws?
And that was my ask right back in June, I think I came
to the, to the, to the committee and asked that question.
And so what we're seeing here is
really the outcome of that process.
So kind of walk us through what did the CBRC have
to say about that, that request and the outcomes of that?
Well the first thing we said is,
oh my God, we're gonna have to get extended.
This is just an awful task.
But fortunately for us
and for those individuals you know
that wanna dig into the difference
between Tom meeting time three
and four, you know, the Moderators association,
who's the author of the fourth edition did a table
that kind of did a back
and forth every single change that was the difference
between three and four.
So we kind of had a roadmap of how to look at that.
And sometimes, even though
that table was like three pages long, sometimes it was,
you know, Tom meeting time edition three, chapter two,
one A now becomes chapter two two,
not just cross reference one B.
It was a cross reference to like where,
where things moved to.
So the town, through your efforts, Andrew was able to,
Tom Clark, Andrew was able to buy us the town meeting time,
fourth books and we borrowed town meeting third time books
from individuals in town who were kind enough, you know,
that had their own versions.
So the committee literally took,
you know, we were all supposed to kind
of read the differences,
but we took categories of areas
that we thought were gonna be
important that had been called out.
So consent agendas was one area.
There's a whole thing on consent agendas.
You know, there was some areas around seconding motions.
There just were areas, there was new things about to,
you know, hybrid time meaning accessibility.
There just were areas where on a high level
it had been pointed out to us
that these areas could be important.
And so we each kind of took our own assignments
and then we brought it back to our committee to say,
we think this is an issue that is,
could be in direct conflict with our current bylaws.
So the point of bringing the motions to the floor
of town meeting is, are you happy with our current bylaws?
'cause if you are, we think we need to fix this. Right.
So there's, there's just so many good things
that are in town.
The fourth edition of town meeting time, fourth edition.
But the, the first three motions are areas
that we thought were in conflict
or could be in conflict with, with our,
you know, procedures for town meeting.
And so the bylaw changes if approved, if, if they go
through and approved at town meeting, would basically
preserve existing practices we already do
At town meeting.
Exactly. Exactly.
And then the fourth motion is sort of what the, the, my,
my hypothesis was earlier is like what would we need to do
to point our bylaws to the fourth edition? Right?
Right. So the way we organized our motions was
to actually discuss the problems first
and give people the right to adopt those bylaw changes.
And then the last motion is to adopt
Tom meeting time fourth edition.
Because I think if we had done fourth edition first
I like it just, it might have thrown off,
you know, doing the bylaws. Right.
So something I wanna point out about that is I have, as,
as moderator, I have recommended
that all motions under article 32
are part of the consent agenda.
I this. And part of the reason I did that is
because the, the, all four
of these motions received unanimous favorable consent
by from recommendation from the finance committee
and also from the select board.
So I, I think it's, it's worth mentioning that they're,
they're, they're pretty non-controversial
Changes.
They're pretty non-controversial changes.
And so yeah, it's good that that the order
that they're in here are, are really good
for flowing debate if I would say,
if debate actually happens.
But I just point out for folks that are listening
and watching that it is on the consent,
I'll go into, you know, a little bit
of detail in the report since we won't be just, you know,
assuming the consent agenda is adopted, you know,
that I'll just be able to give people a little bit of,
but not a lot but some.
So under article 30 you'll kind
Of talk about this little bit, right?
Ill kind of talk about it. Yeah. Great.
So motion a is
that motions will require a second.
And so this was kind of the
first thing that jumped out at us.
'cause there's just a line in town meeting four edition most
seconding emotion is not necessary.
We take it as
For granted we take it
right, we just take it for granted.
And they do say in the town meeting time in the fourth
edition that if it's your
standard practice you should continue.
But we just felt that it should be part
of our bylaw since it kids like in the way it's written in
to meeting time four, it almost leaves it
to moderator discretion.
Right. Do you want to have a second or not?
And so clearly there are certain motions
that automatically don't need a second.
And I, I don't need to go into those
'cause I'm not sure I'd be able to repeat them all.
But like motion to dissolve. You don't have like that's the
Most, that's very clearly in the table, in the table of
And motions of press and motions.
There are some that are listed there that are not,
that don't require a second.
But we feel that if someone puts a motion on the floor,
it requires a second.
And part of the reason for
that is like sometimes someone could put a motion on the
floor that's just, nobody thinks it's gonna be a good idea.
You can hear the crickets. Yeah you can hear. Right.
And so, you know, I, you know, I, I moved to make I move,
I moved to remove you as moderator
and that there's no second
because people think it's ridiculous,
then you can't take action on that motion.
So requiring second also prevents
like silly motions from being put on the floor
and debated just to kill it.
So we just think given the vagueness of mating time four,
that you might not need a second Natick
by practice seconds motions.
And we think that that should be included in our
TOM meeting, prestigious bylaw
All and then motion B.
Can we go on motion C first? Okay, sure.
Let start motion C first. Like I just think motion B is a
little bit, I just wanna make sure I kind
of do it correctly.
Okay. But it, it's,
I I just think motion B is a little confusing
so I'd rather just go straight to C first.
Okay. So, and this was actually found by a member
of our committee who is really digging into the book this
actually, this difference wasn't really pointed out in the
mapping of the difference between three and four.
But Natick has a practice
by bylaw natick the motion to dissolve.
So motion three is about the motion to dissolve
and the motion
to dissolve cannot take place under Natick bylaw
until all warrant articles have been dealt with.
That's why if there's no action on a, you know,
a warrant article 'cause nobody wants to do anything
after it was put on the warrant,
we still have to vote no action.
'cause you have to take, you have to deal with the business.
You have to deal with the business that's put forward
by the, by the warrant article
in town meeting time four, there are a couple
of clauses on the motion to dissolve
that would allow a motion to dissolve
to happen without the article being disposed of.
So you could actually like delay it to a time certain,
or you could put the motion on the table
and take it up at a future point.
So time act. So you act on it
but you haven't acted disposed.
It acted but you haven't disposed of it.
So in Under Town meeting time four,
let's just say someone doesn't wanna deal with the CPC
articles that might be controversial.
So you, but the CPC actually, you know,
moved the Community Preservation Act articles
to a time certain so that the people
that are gonna discuss it could be there.
And so what could happen under town meeting time four if
people understood it and we just followed town meeting time.
Four is you move it to a time certain
and then action has been taken on it
and you move to dissolve
and you have to vote that right away.
Motion to dissolve doesn't require a second
or it doesn't require it
Is the most, it's the highest order
On the president, it's the high.
Right. And you can't debate it.
So the only way to defeat a motion to dissolve is
to defeat it, you know.
But if there's enough people that don't wanna deal with it,
you could literally not deal
with the controversial Community Preservation Act.
You know? So I'm just saying
what we are proposing is we've used the exact words
of our existing bylaw just to reinforce that a motion
to dissolve requires
that all the actions put forward on the town meeting warrant
are handled before.
Like there's no, like these no ambiguity,
these little ambiguity, these little incidental things
that actions that could be taken would not allow natick
to dissolve town beating
before all business was taken care of. Right.
Should we take a stab at motion B?
Which is, what is it leg
Legally?
It's called motions of Doubtful. Legality. Okay.
So I, I hope I do this right.
I think I've heard it enough times.
The chair is the most familiar with this,
but motions
of doubtful legality can occur if Tom meeting were
to take up business, they have no business taking
or a town like somebody put a motion that was illegal.
So anyway, there are problems obviously with motions
of doubtful legality, but there are also times when there
are statutory requirements for business to be
before town meetings, such
as I talked about already planning board, they have
to have a public hearing on the zoning article.
So if the planning board had a motion
for a zoning change
and couldn't hold the public hearing, okay.
And then that there was a motion to deal with
that on Tom meeting floor, that would be a motion
of doubtful legality
because the statutory requirement has not been met.
Has not been met. Okay.
So that's the example in
what they talk about in town meeting time.
Four is the statutory requirement
and they also can, they say that finance committee
public hearings can be required by bylaw,
but they are not statutory.
Hmm. So the committee just felt that for Natick to preserve
what we do, we wanted to put forward the language in motion
be such that two things
we're preserving our finance committee bylaw,
that we have a public hearing that
that becomes statutory for natick.
That something can't come before to meeting
unless we have the public hearing.
But we have a way around that there's
A motion that you could make to waive the, the
Requirements.
Yes. So, you know, sometimes like, you know, let's just say,
you know, you're dealing with, you know,
the town like fall town meeting
and we're dealing with the budget
and something comes up at the last minute
that the town realizes you get like late
information breaking from the
State after
A finance committee, closure
after finance committee, before town meeting right
before town meeting or even in the middle of town meeting,
then the town, you know, like you, you, you're dealing
with the financial considerations of the town
and it's really important that we deal with this issue,
but we couldn't get it to a fin public hearing.
A motion can be made to waive the public hearing
of the finance committee
and it has to pass town, town meeting by two
But's an intentional decision by town
Meeting.
Yes. It's an intentional decision by town meeting to waive
the public hearing, the finance public hearing.
And so like we created that, you know, at the time
that they created the bylaw for the finance committee, they,
they created this workaround for these kind
of emergency situations just
to make sure the town business could be handled.
We just feel that those should be codified in this motion.
B, so that there's no question that
our finance committee hearings are statutory for Natick,
even though in town meeting time four, excuse me,
they weren't written as statutory.
We're treating them as statutory,
but they're not by law statutory.
Does that make sense? It makes
A ton of sense.
I think you did a great job explaining that one.
I i as much as I've even paid attention.
That was actually really, really good explanation
and all the details about this in the text of the motion
or in the finance committee recommendation book, as
with any motion that's in front
of town meeting, please do read the details.
This one, this one does actually show the specific
language changes made in the bylaw in detail and,
and all that, all that material's available for the members.
It, it, it's, it, you know, in some ways it feels like,
is it really, like, is it silly that we had to do this
but it's, we just like our, you know, in our council helped
to make sure to review the language.
It, there's just no doubt in acquiring, you know,
in passing this motion
and putting that language into the bylaw that yes,
we follow Tom meeting time four assuming we passed
that motion, but that our practices again,
icks practices Correct. Have been preserved.
Absolutely. I think that's, I think that's all there is
to say about Article 32.
Oh, that's what I say, Tom meeting
icks practices are being
Preserved.
Yes. It's, and that's, I think that's the outcome if,
if these motions are passed.
Yes. Again, thank you to you
and the, the CBRC for taking up that action, reviewing that.
So then we have one final motion. Yeah.
And that's motion D
and that is for Tom meeting to accept the fourth edition
of Tom Meeting time as the book to follow moving forward.
And we specifically not just named the fourth meet,
you know, we, we say for me, you know,
Tom meeting time fourth edition, you know, authored
by the Moderators Association
and we did it that intentionally
because if we just said future editions, then
This could
Happen again.
This could happen again. Right.
So it's really gonna be important if there's a future
edition of town meeting time that you know, somebody,
a committee or whatever, somebody reviews it to make sure
that it doesn't supersede current practices.
'cause you need to codify that into bylaw or you'd lose
It.
Yeah. And, and it's,
it was like 20 years difference between Yes. Yes.
It's gonna be on
A long,
the edition, the fourth edition.
I'm, I'm pretty, and I, I know, I know a lot
of the folks at the Mass Monitors Association,
They're not gonna wanna take this on again,
This isn't something they do very often.
Yeah. So, but the good news is,
is now our bylaws will be if,
if passed our bylaws will be updated,
pointed to the fourth edition.
If this happens again, we'd be intentional, we'd review it.
Right, right. We, we'd do the same process we just did
and make additional set of
Recommendations.
But the other thing is that, you know, we pass these bylaws,
they're gonna have to be reviewed by the Attorney General.
So if everything is approved by the Attorney general,
by springtime meeting, we would do, we
Could use coming time
Fourth coming in fourth edition.
So, and that's, and that's what I'm thinking.
So, because you mentioned also about the books,
and I wanna mention this for members as well.
When we, when we did the review with the CBRC,
you had access to both the third and the fourth edition.
Yes. Town meeting members may not own the fourth edition yet
because they didn't know that, that
this is a thing they could acquire.
So we're going to have reference copies available to flip
through at town meeting.
So we are gonna be stamping them
and marking them as property of the town,
but they're on the tables to, to look through
and review also the sub, the, the sections
that were affected for both
the third and the fourth edition.
We got rights to do copies of that to make, to share that
with members as well as part
of the materials on the CBRC website.
And it was shared with the finance committee
in terms of those materials.
And I bring that up to say, if you really wanna dig into the
changes and as a, as a town meeting member
who would be affected by these changes,
we have the materials that you can dig into that.
And then once town meeting is over here in the fall,
we're gonna make sure those copies
of the fourth edition go into our library system.
Yes. Yes. Because one of the things we found
that was very difficult is we had a hard time finding.
Right. We had a hard time finding the third edition, even
The third edition in our library.
Right? Yes. And, and there was one
that was hanging out in Lake Norwood somewhere,
and we couldn't get access to it.
So I have to,
Every, every book that was used by the seven members
of the committee have all been returned,
you know, to, to do just that. So
They'll, they'll find their way, way back in the hands
of the library system and they'll be available for citizens
and members as well in the future.
Yep. Thank you again, Chris, for coming in.
Appreciate the time. You're welcome.
Thanks for having me.
Okay,
now we're gonna talk about Article 33,
A Moratorium on Artificial Turf.
I'm joined today by Roger Luckman, who is part
of the sponsor team for Article 33.
Maybe Roger, tell us a little bit about yourself,
the team, and, and Sure.
What, what we mean by a moratorium on artificial turf. Okay.
Good questions. So I,
I am a 30 year resident of Natick.
I'm retired from a long career in academic medicine
at UMass Medical School.
I have a background in occupational medicine, primary care,
public health, environmental health.
And that's why I got drawn into this issue.
The other members of our team are Donna McKenzie
and Ian Lum, a town meeting member Rick Devereux,
who's got quite a bit of experience
in teaching kids about sports.
And this part of this moratorium,
it does have a relationship to sports.
Right. And kid sports for sure.
So I, I, I got involved, I think
because of my background in, in public health in particular,
right now, the, the main concern that we have this time
around with moratorium is that
microplastics are becoming an increasing,
an increasing concern in the medical community.
We, we did have this, a similar, a similar motion
before town meeting last spring.
At that time, there was less information available about the
health impacts of microplastics.
But over the last year, there have been a couple of studies
that have gotten me in particular very concerned
about microplastics.
We've identified in, in multiple studies
that microplastics are present in all of our bodies,
in all of our organs.
Most recently it's been found in our brains.
And there is
evidence now from the first clinical study
that in, in my mind at least takes us
to another level in terms of the potential risk
of microplastic in, in, in stroke
heart attack in particular.
I don't go, go think, you don't want to go into the details,
but there was a study in New England Journal that came out
that I think is, brings us to a different level.
And that that's really the reason that, I mean,
I, from the medical point of view, from my concern about
public health and my patient's health,
really feel like it's time to, to step back
before we jump into thinking about putting some more new
artificial turf on our fields.
In Natick, our moratorium is,
is not about saying we need
to take out our artificial turf we already have,
or that we can't maintain it or resurface it.
That's a, a challenging proposition,
but we think it's time now
before we think about putting in any new artificial turf
to take a look at the evidence of the health impacts and,
and that evidence is gonna be growing over time.
My my personal view is that we will
probably over the next three years,
and this is a moratorium, asking for a a three year delay
before we make any decisions about artificial turf, I think
we are going to have an increasing amount of evidence
about the specific health impacts.
And we could be headed to a place like we are with,
with PFAS, where once we learn how widespread this is,
how serious the health concerns are, that we are going
to be seeing a lot of regulation a around
artificial turf as a major contributor to, to microplastic.
So that the, what folks need to know about this is that
artificial turf throughout the United States
and throughout the world is actually a major contributor
to microplastics in the environment.
The plastic yarn that makes up the blades
of micro of these artificial turf fields.
They, they are deteriorating periodically because of use
and because of exposure to sun, anywhere from about one
to 8% of these fibers come off the turf every year
into our environment.
And then they start breaking down into these tiny little
pellets that we call microplastic.
And along the way, as they move through our environment
into the waterways, into our drinking water, into the ocean,
into our fish, they're also picking up a variety
of toxins from the environment.
So there's little microplastic things are,
are really little tiny poison pills
and like PFAS, they're, they're forever, they,
they never completely break down.
So when they enter our body, they're gonna be staying there
permanently with whatever toxins they brought in with them
into the organs that they've been dispersed to.
So this moratorium is meant
to be advisory in nature, right?
Yes. So the way the motion is written, the motion
that's in front of the members, I think motion a
that's under this was actually marked as no action
because it was asking for a bylaw change.
Right. And that's out of the scope of the article,
but motion b is an advisory one.
Yes. So what are you expecting to happen
with this motion at town meeting?
If a moratorium in place, what does that really mean?
How does that, what do you think that's gonna message
that's gonna send to who at the town needs to hear? Right.
So, well we, I can say that's it, you know, since
our presentation in the spring where we were referred to
the select board, the school committee,
and the Board of Health, we have been meeting with all
of those folks just recently with the Board
of Health last week.
And also with the Conservation Commission,
the Open Space Commission and with the select board
and also Net zero as well as the finance committee, which
of course is required.
We had a, a vote of fortitude for
a favorable referral, not quite enough
to actually get a referral from the finance committee,
but a significant majority.
And the select board was two to two at the,
in the net zero committee was four zero in favor of our,
our recommendation for a moratorium.
And I, I think as we've been going around,
we've been explaining that with this period of time,
this three year period, we're gonna, that we have a lot
to learn, but we as a town, I think need to come together
putting together a task force that acknowledges the fact
that this just isn't a, a, a decision
for the school committee alone.
Yes, we all care about the kids
who are playing on this turf.
And in and in fact at the moment,
while there are some remaining concerns about players,
the main concern has now become about public health.
So we genuinely feel that a task force
that includes folks from the board of health,
folks from our public and experts in environmental health
and public health need to be at the table with the folks
from the school committee, open space committee
and others who also genuinely care about having
adequate field space for all of the recreation we want
to have in Natick.
So we need to have a balance of those interests at the table
to take the time to take, look at emerging evidence
for serious health concerns.
But at the same time,
the good news is there are some new alternatives
that are beginning to emerge as well.
There are some hybrid forms of artificial turf
that are mostly real grass.
There are some new forms of artificial turf made out
of materials other than plastic.
Right now these are high-end products used
in Olympics and elsewhere.
But as time goes on, you know, things become less expensive
and more accessible, we feel like this is a good time
to take a breath, wait for all of these things to emerge,
have a task force looking into all of the possibilities, all
of the options, all of the risks.
And then together coming up with some recommendations
that we can then pass on to the town bodies
who are gonna have to make the decisions about whether we're
gonna go with an artificial turf field.
So while the moratorium makes space for those sorts
of activities, are there any projects
that are pending right now in front of the town
that might come up in that time period of the moratorium
that might need to be acted on or considered? Sure.
Yeah. Good, good question.
So this really all started
because the town meeting did vote to fund a design study
for a resurfacing of the JV field at the high school.
A field that has been allowed to deteriorate over time
and whatever kind of surfaces needed, something needs
to be done if, if it's gonna be really usable
and safe for our students.
We, we attempted to do the best we could to engage
with the folks in this design study.
There wasn't a lot of interest in bringing us in
in any significant capacity,
but we did meet with the consultants when they made their
initial presentation to some representatives
of the school committee.
We were very disappointed that they,
they really very quickly for all the usual reasons that
artificial turf allows more playable time
and that it's been around a long time and,
and the consultants were used to recommending it.
So it was coming forward as, as an initial recommendation,
we've yet to see a final report on this.
Okay. But we were disappointed
they're headed in that direction.
Now, my my understanding is
that there are some funding issues
and other issues to be ironed out
before it's likely there'll be any final decision made
about the JV field.
Right. But it's out there
and I, I think for folks who are looking for more space
for kids to play, there are, I think people in town
and maybe in the school committee who would like to,
you know, if we can,
when possible move forward with that field.
So it is possible something could
come up in that three year term. And if
It did, that would be a project that would have
to be funded and appropriated for in the usual manner.
And, and the project itself,
any project would might come in front of town meeting
for act for appropriation.
Yes, exactly. So there'd be another time to have this,
a similar conversation at those projects too.
Yeah. Our, our feeling is that we want to be pro,
we think we should be proactive about this rather than wait
for right
before town meeting for us to realize that there,
there's gonna be a funding decision coming up for a field
for us to then have to start the process of educating folks.
We think it takes some time
and we're prepared to invest the time
and energy to educate all folks in town
about all sides of this issue.
And, and that's, that is gonna take time so that
we're having a forum next week, we're inviting everybody
in town and surrounding towns to come
and hear what we've had to say.
And like I said, if we, if we could, if we get a, the,
the a favorable vote on the moratorium as an advisory
is really in, in our mind, sending a message
to the appropriate town bodies
to say the town meeting really feels like we do
need to look into this.
The task force I think is probably the best idea.
And we've certainly gotten some positive responses from
folks and, and the select board
and elsewhere that, yeah, this seems like the way to go.
So that's the reason for doing this now
and not waiting until there's a funding decision. Alright.
Well thanks so much for coming in Roger and,
and talking about the article 33.
If people have more questions about the details, a lot
of the discussion about the article is included in the
finance committee recommendation book,
all the presentation materials that you've been making.
I think you'll, you'll be part of the team
making a presentation at town meeting. Well,
Yes, I'll be there for
Sure.
And I'm assuming there'll be some slides,
maybe some imagery as well.
Sure. We'll probably get that in advance.
I'd like to get that in advance. Lot will be on the website
so that people can have seen your presentation
and come equipped with questions.
Totally. And I'm sure that you would, you
and the team would welcome questions in advance as well.
AB Absolutely. We're, we're very, very much committed
to an open dialogue
and I think we're, we're well prepared
with having done a lot of research into this area
to respond to most questions.
All right. Thank you so much. Thank
You.
And with that, I, I think that's Article 33.
That's the last article on the warrant.
Looking forward to seeing all town meeting members
and the public at town meeting
that kicks off on October 21st, Tuesday night,
7:30 PM at Kennedy Middle School.
See you all there.
All right.